Introduction
Set the stage. Introduce the problem you are trying to solve. Identify sources of data. Describe why the data needs to be transformed.

The goal of this project is to visualize the relationships between population age structure, median age, fertility rates (TFR), and births to determine 
whether countries with older populations tend to have lower fertility rates and fewer births.
Since the raw datasets provided are large text files with many columns and values, 
the data must be transformed to have relevant data such as age groups, percentages, 
and country-level statistics before comparisons can be made.


Data Sources
Where did you find your data?
When did you access it?
Cite your sources, using the APA format.

The primary datasets come from the U.S. Census Bureau International Database (IDB). 
This project also uses a country reference file created by arturictus that maps ISO country codes 
to country names and regions. All files were first accessed on Monday, February 9th.
Sources (APA)
U.S. Census Bureau. (2025). International Database (IDB). https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/international-programs/about/idb.html
Arturictus. (n.d.). ISO 3166 countries with regional codes. GitHub. https://github.com/lukes/ISO-3166-Countries-with-Regional-Codes


Extraction
Where did you get the data from?
How did you get the data?
What format is the extracted data?
What steps were taken to extract the data? Be sure to number steps when the order matters.

The data is from the U.S. Census Bureau International Database (IDB) and also the GitHub ISO country mapping file (all.csv)
The IDB datasets were downloaded from the Census website and the ISO mapping file was downloaded from GitHub.
The IDB files are pipe-delimited .txt files and the Country mapping file is .csv.
Steps Taken:
1. Used pandas.read_csv() to load idb5yr.txt and idbsingleyear.txt.
2. Loaded all.csv to map ISO alpha-2 codes to country names and regions.
3. Created three DataFrames: Main demographic data, Single-year age data, Population age-range data


Transformation
Did you use all of the data you extracted as-is?
Did you remove columns? Did you change columns’ names?
Did you change column formats?
What steps were taken to get the data in a form that you could use it? Be sure to number steps when the order matters.

The extracted datasets were not used as-is. Several transformations were done to make the data usable. These include removing columns, changing column names
and also performing calculations to create new columns. 
Steps Taken:
1. Filtered each DataFrame to include only required columns.
2. Aggregated population totals by country and year.
3. Calculated average Total Fertility Rate (TFR) per country and year using groupby() and mean().
4. Combined individual age columns into five broader age groups.
5. Merged total population, fertility rate, and age-group datasets using #YR and GEO_ID.
6. Converted each age group's raw population counts into percentages of total population.
7. Created a function that identifies the alpha-2 from GEO_ID by using a custom regex. 
8. Extracted ISO alpha-2 country codes from the GEO_ID field by using the function on the merged dataframe.
9. Joined country names and regions using all.csv via the extracted alpha-2 codes.
10. Removed intermediate columns and dropped rows containing missing values.

Load
If you were to load your transformed data into a relational database, what steps would you take to make that happen? Be sure to number steps when the order matters.
Steps To Be Taken:
1. Design a database schema. 
2. Execute the schema (DDL) in MySQL.
3. Export the final Pandas DataFrame to a CSV file using to_csv().
4. Use MySQL’s LOAD DATA to load the CSV into the corresponding table.
5. Verify the load by running SELECT queries.